Welcome back guys, to Cinema Summary
today's film is a neo-noir about a
real messed up court case and it's
accused murderer
this is Primal Fear
this guy here a Chicago defense attorney
Martin Vail
a real slimeball of a lawyer who loves the
limelight and is really good at getting
his clients out of court using legal
loopholes in the system maybe by chance
or a higher plan he sees a news report
about the arrests of Aaron Stampler an
altar boy from Kentucky with a severe
stutter who was accused of brutally
murdering the beloved Archbishop Rushman!
Vail decides then and there to be the
altar boys lawyer pro bono,
that's lawyer
talk for "I'm-a-do-this-for-free"
Vail's meeting with Aaron in the county jail
leads him to believe that Stampler is
innocent
"There was someone else in that
room Mr. Vail."
"There was a.. third person?"
"Yes, sir."
"Did you tell the police this?"
"Yes, yes I did."
Though the prosecutor, a lawyer who
is trying to get Aaron convicted Janet
Venable is none too happy.
Doesn't help that she is Vail's old girlfriend.
Vail and his team investigate into leads that
will help them get Aaron free of the
case. Snooping around at Aaron's old
apartment has one of Vail's assistants
find a photo of a girl, Linda and have a
brief scuffle with another altar boy
that Aaron knew named Alex.
The main move by Vail is to get psychiatrist Molly
Arrington to evaluate him to make the
case against Aaron weaker. Their first
meeting has Aaron hint at being abused
by his dad and that Aaron has blank
spots in his memory.
As the trial begins
Vail discovers that powerful civic
leaders, people of power who are supposed
to help the city and including the
corrupt state's attorney John
Shaughnessy have lost millions of
dollars in tearing down old buildings
and making new condos kicking people out
who used to live there as result
Only to have the archbishop put a stop to
this plan, stopping any construction work
around certain church lands. A lot of
people weren't happy with that so the
Archbishop got lots of hate mail and
death threats
The second meeting between Aaron a psychiatrist reveals that Aaron
and Linda were together and having sex
though in Aaron's words one day she just
disappeared.
Vail with his assistant trap Alex and
confront him for information
Alex tells them that he was looking for
a tape which has a recording of the
Archbishop's sermon featuring Alex, Linda
and Aaron doing 'sex stuff' at the command
of the Archbishop.
This all leads to Vail making a search
of the Archbishop's apartment where he
finds the VHS tape of Stampler being forced
to have sex with Alex and Linda this isn't a
good thing introducing this evidence
would make the jury feel sorry for the
boy but this gives a motive as to why
Stampler killed the Archbishop meaning
that the prosecutor Janet can get
this kid convicted and sent to jail.
Vail needs answers pronto so he meets with
Stampler and accuses Stampler of lying.
The kid can't catch a break and
something changes...
"You little sissy, you
make me sick!"
the way he talks, the way he acts
Aaron is not talking anymore
No, instead a violent psycho named "Roy" is
who confesses to murdering the
Archbishop and whatever the hell just
happened stops when Roy goes away and suddenly
becomes shy innocent Aaron again.
This is an example of one of those blank
spots in Aaron's memory.
The psychiatrist examining Stampler is
convinced that he has disassociative
identity disorder caused by years of
abuse at the hands of his father since
he can't enter an insanity defense
during a trial this is absolutely
useless for Vail
Now people with disassociative identity disorder
or multiple personality disorder have
different personalities, like another
person inside of them. The memory loss that
happens is because one of the
personalities is in control and the
other one isn't.
So if you don't remember
watching this then uh
you know someone's got a problem.
Now like I said before
Vail is a slimeball and he's damn good
at his job so he leaves a trail of clues
about the Archbishop's pedophilia and
Stampler's other self, all to set up his master plan.
The cherry on top is him sending the VHS tape to Janet the Prosecutor
knowing she'll know he sent it and will use it as evidence as proof of motive
Can't be helped that Shaughnessy and her boss are pressuring
her to not reveal the information later
Later, Vail puts Stampler on the witness stand
and gently questions him about the abuse
he suffered at the Archbishop's hands
and Janet just starts grilling him
during the cross-examination so badly
that Stampler turns into Roy and in
front of everybody, grabs her, threatening
to snap her neck if anyone comes near
him he is stopped by the courthouse
guards and rushed back to his holding
cell. The judge dismisses the jury in
favor of a bench trial and then fights
Stampler not guilty by reason of
insanity sending him to a
maximum-security mental hospital instead.
Nice job, Vail!
Oh and Janet gets fired for losing the case and allowing the
Archbishop's crimes, which both the
Catholic Church in the City Council had
been trying to hide for the past ten
years, is now revealed to everyone
Vail visits Aaron in his cell and tells him
that his case has been dismissed
Stampler says he recalls nothing of what
happened in the courtroom having once
again 'lost time' (blank spots).
Just as Vale leaving Stampler asks him
to tell Miss Venable that I hope her
neck is okay. Wait a damn second!
Vale confronts him and Aaron reveals that he
had faked a multiple personality
disorder this whole time. No longer
stuttering he brags about having
murdered Archbishop Rushman as well as Linda
when Vail asks "there never was a Roy?"
Stampler replies "There never was an
Aaron, counselor."
a stunned Vail, his belief in the goodness of all people now broken
realizes just what the hell he let happen.
Walks away as Stampler taunts him from his cell
Thank you for watching, ladies and gentlemen.
if you did enjoy it leave a like down below and subscribe to
get updated on our latest uploads until
next time
See you later there counselor